Donald Trump to 'declare WAR on EU' over trade tariffs, according to SHOCKING report

 The US President is expected to announce the tariffs as early as today,
according to The Wall Street Journal.

 The decision will undoubtedly ruffle feathers in Europe with French President
Emmanuel Macron, German Chancellor Angela Merkel and Prime Minister Theresa May
issuing a joint statement that the countries should be ready in the event the
US tariffs went ahead.

 The statement read: “The European Union should be ready to decisively defend
its interests within the framework of multilateral trade rules.”

 The tariffs are a culmination of a dramatic three months since the US President
announced a 25 per cent steel tariff and 10 aluminium tariff.

 Trump initially postponed the tariffs with a May 1 expiration but after talks
did not progress with the EU on an alternative solution, the President delayed
his deadline until June 1.

 At an Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) meeting on
Wednesday, US Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross attacked the EU countries for not
coming to the table while the tariffs were in effect.

 Mr Ross cited the willingness of China to discuss a deal as an example of how
negotiations should go.

He said: "China is an interesting case in point.

 "They are paying the tariffs, they came into effect in March and they haven’t
used this as an excuse not to talk.

“It’s only the EU insisting we can’t negotiate if there are tariffs."

 But before the exemption, the EU threatened to respond with tariffs on US goods
like motorcycles, blue jeans, and bourbon.

 According to the Wall Street Journal, the trade war could be avoided by a
last-minute deal.

But an agreement seems to be highly unlikely.

 The Wall Street Journal, citing Chinese officials, said Beijing is looking to
line up countries against Washington.

 The unnamed countries in question are mostly in Europe and Asia, where
companies would benefit from China’s plans to give foreign firms more open
access to its markets.

 It will also respond to the threats from US President Donald Trump by imposing
tariffs on up to $150billion (£112billion) of Chinese goods.

 This latest trade escalation comes after the two sides had agreed during talks
in Washington in May to find ways of narrowing China’s $375billion
(£281billion) trade surplus.

 Chinese Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying said: "We urge the United
States to keep its promise, and meet China halfway in the spirit of the joint
statement.”