Prosecutors interview Comey as they investigate whether McCabe should be charged

 Investigators from the D.C. U.S. Attorney’s Office recently interviewed former
FBI director James B. Comey as part of a probe into whether his deputy, Andrew
McCabe, broke the law by lying to federal agents — an indication the office is
seriously considering whether McCabe should be charged with a crime, a person
familiar with the matter said.

Justice Department Inspector General Michael E. Horowitz [accused McCabe in April of misleading
investigators|https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/justice-department-inspector-general-provides-report-to-congress-on-andrew-mccabe/2018/04/13/ce367c4c-3f36-11e8-974f-aacd97698cef_story.html?utm_term=.db79ff129966]
and Comey four times — three of them under oath — about authorizing a
disclosure to the media. Horowitz referred the findings to the D.C. U.S.
Attorney’s Office to determine whether criminal charges are warranted.

 Lying to federal investigators can carry a five-year prison sentence, though
McCabe disputes that he intentionally misled anyone. Comey’s interview, while
significant, does not indicate prosecutors have reached any conclusions, and
people familiar with the process said it is not surprising given the
allegations McCabe faces. A referral from the inspector general does not
guarantee charges will be filed. [  [Inspector general referred findings on McCabe
to U.S. attorney for consideration of criminal
charges|https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/inspector-general-referred-findings-on-mccabe-to-us-attorney-for-consideration-of-criminal-charges/2018/04/19/a200cabc-43f3-11e8-8569-26fda6b404c7_story.html?utm_term=.1c29b216f15a]
 ]  Michael R. Bromwich, McCabe’s lawyer, said in a statement: “A little more
than a month ago, we confirmed that we had been advised that a criminal
referral to the U.S. Attorney’s Office had been made regarding Mr. McCabe. We
said at that time that we were confident that, unless there is inappropriate
pressure from high levels of the Administration, the U.S. Attorney’s Office
would conclude that it should decline to prosecute. Our view has not changed.”

 He added that “leaks concerning specific investigative steps the US Attorney’s
Office has allegedly taken are extremely disturbing.”

A Justice Department spokeswoman and a lawyer for Comey declined to comment.

 Even before the allegations against him, McCabe had become a lightning rod in
the political battles over the FBI and special counsel Robert S. Mueller III’s
probe of Russian interference in the 2016 election. President Trump has
frequently attacked the FBI’s former No. 2 official, largely over political
donations his wife took from an ally of Hillary Clinton when she ran for a seat
in the Virginia legislature. McCabe was fired in March.

 The U.S. attorney’s investigation into McCabe is likely to intensify partisan
squabbling, pitting respected law enforcement leaders against one another and
potentially giving Trump ammunition to attack.

 McCabe and Comey are at odds over the inspector general’s findings. McCabe
asserts that Comey knew he authorized the media disclosure, and Comey claims
otherwise. Comey has said he “could well be a witness” against McCabe if McCabe
were ever charged and tried.

McCabe also is somewhat at odds with Justice Department leaders.

He [oversaw an
investigation|https://abcnews.go.com/US/exclusive-fired-fbi-official-authorized-criminal-probe-sessions/story?id=53914006]
, which now seems to have concluded, into whether Attorney General Jeff
Sessions lied to Congress about his contacts with Russians. He also kept notes
detailing an interaction with Sessions’s top deputy, Rod J. Rosenstein, that
raise questions about a memo Rosenstein wrote justifying Comey’s firing.

 Rosenstein’s memo took aim at Comey for his handling of the investigation into
Clinton’s use of a private email server while secretary of state. McCabe’s
notes, though, suggest Trump told Rosenstein before he authored the memo to
mention Russia — though it was unclear in what respect, according to a person
familiar with the matter.

The contents of the memo, which ultimately did not mention Russia, were first [reported by the New York Times on Wednesday
night|https://www.nytimes.com/2018/05/30/us/politics/rosenstein-trump-comey-firing-mccabe-memo.html]
. Bromwich suggested in his statement that the Times report might have
motivated a disclosure of Comey’s interview.

 “We think it is no coincidence that these leaks follow within 24 hours of media
stories — based on other leaks whose source is unknown to us — about memos
written by Mr. McCabe that suggest potential criminal conduct by the
President,” Bromwich said. “We will be demanding a leaks investigation.”

 McCabe’s interactions with Rosenstein could complicate any potential
prosecution of McCabe because Rosenstein would likely be involved in a final
decision on filing charges. McCabe has argued that the Justice Department’s
actions against him, including his firing, are retaliatory for his work on the
Russia investigation.

 Mueller is investigating Comey’s firing as part of his examination into whether
Trump obstructed justice, and Rosenstein is supervising Mueller’s probe. The
president has said publicly that the Russia case was on his mind when he fired
Comey, though he tweeted Thursday that he “never fired James Comey because of
Russia!”

Sessions [fired McCabe from the bureau just 26 hours before he could
retire|https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/fbis-andrew-mccabe-is-fired-a-little-more-than-24-hours-before-he-could-retire/2018/03/16/e055a22a-2895-11e8-bc72-077aa4dab9ef_story.html?utm_term=.7464555b9830]
, based on the inspector general’s findings and a recommendation from the FBI’s
Office of Professional Responsibility.

The next morning, Trump took to Twitter to celebrate the move.

 “Andrew McCabe FIRED, a great day for the hard working men and women of the FBI
- A great day for Democracy,” he wrote. “Sanctimonious James Comey was his boss
and made McCabe look like a choirboy. He knew all about the lies and corruption
going on at the highest levels of the FBI!”

 By the inspector general’s telling, in seeking to advance his own interests,
McCabe authorized two FBI officials to talk to the Wall Street Journal about a
story he believed would cast him as standing in the way of a probe of Hillary
Clinton’s foundation. Then, according to the inspector general, McCabe misled
Comey and FBI and inspector general investigators about having done so.

 The October 2016 story offered a detailed look at debates inside the Justice
Department and FBI over two Clinton-related probes — the examination of her
private email server and the separate case involving the foundation. It notably
confirmed the existence of the foundation investigation and described an
episode in which McCabe pushed back against a Justice Department official whom
he perceived to be suggesting the FBI shut it down.

 Comey and McCabe offered varying accounts of who authorized the disclosure for
the article. They discussed the story the day after it was published, and
Comey, according to the inspector general’s report, told investigators McCabe
“definitely did not tell me that he authorized” the disclosure. [  [Comey and
McCabe, once strong defenders of each other, stake out opposite positions in
burgeoning
feud|https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/comey-and-mccabe-once-strong-defenders-of-each-other-stake-out-opposite-positions-in-burgeoning-feud/2018/04/20/552b3116-4419-11e8-8569-26fda6b404c7_story.html?utm_term=.5b601745d01e]
 ]  “I have a strong impression he conveyed to me ‘it wasn’t me boss.’ And I
don’t think that was by saying those words, I think it was most likely by
saying ‘I don’t know how this s--- gets in the media or why would people talk
about this kind of thing,’ words that I would fairly take as ‘I, Andy, didn’t
do it,’ ” Comey said, according to the inspector general.

 McCabe has countered that emails between the two “clearly show that Mr. McCabe
specifically advised Director Comey that he was working with colleagues at the
FBI to correct inaccuracies in the story before it was published, and that they
remained in contact through the weekend while the work was taking place.” Those
emails, though, were in reference to a different Wall Street Journal story
about donations McCabe’s wife had received from a political action committee
controlled by Terry McAuliffe, a Clinton ally, McCabe’s lawyer has
acknowledged. The inspector general ultimately credited Comey’s account.

 Lying to Comey might not itself be a crime. But the inspector general alleged
McCabe misled investigators three other times.

 He told agents from the FBI inspection division on May 9, 2017, that he had not
authorized the disclosure and did not know who had, the inspector general
alleged. McCabe similarly told inspector general investigators on July 28 that
he was not aware of one of the FBI officials, lawyer Lisa Page, having been
authorized to speak to reporters, and because he was not in Washington on the
days she did so, he could not say what she was doing. McCabe later admitted he
authorized Page to talk to reporters.

 The inspector general also alleged that McCabe lied in a final conversation in
November, claiming that he had told Comey he had authorized the disclosure and
that he had not claimed otherwise to inspection division agents in May.

 Bromwich has said previously that McCabe’s statements are “properly understood
as the result of misunderstanding, miscommunication, and honest failures of
recollection based on the swirl of events around him, statements which he
subsequently corrected.” He has also blasted McCabe’s treatment and asserted
that the inspector general did not detail “any understandable motive for his
alleged wrongdoing.”